---
marp: true
math: mathjax
paginate: true
style: |
  section::after {
    content: attr(data-marpit-pagination) '/' attr(data-marpit-pagination-total);
  }

---

# CS100 Lecture 21

Inheritance and Polymorphism <span style="color: black; font-family: Times New Roman; font-size: 1.05em;">I</span>

---

## Contents

- Inheritance
- Dynamic binding and polymorphism

---

# Inheritance

---

## Example: An item for sale

```cpp
class Item {
  std::string m_name;
  double m_price = 0.0;
public:
  Item() = default;
  Item(const std::string &name, double price)
      : m_name(name), m_price(price) {}
  const auto &getName() const { return m_name; }
  auto netPrice(int cnt) const {
    return cnt * m_price;
  }
};
```

---

## Defining a subclass

A discounted item **is an** item, and has more information:
- `std::size_t m_minQuantity;`
- `double m_discount;`

The net price for such an item is

$$
\text{netPrice}(n)=\begin{cases}
n\cdot\text{price},&\text{if }n<\text{minQuantity},\\
n\cdot\text{discount}\cdot\text{price},&\text{otherwise}.
\end{cases}
$$

---

## Defining a subclass

Use **inheritance** to model the "is-a" relationship:

- A discounted item **is an** item.

```cpp
class DiscountedItem : public Item {
  int m_minQuantity = 0;
  double m_discount = 1.0;
public:
  // constructors
  // netPrice
};
```

---

## `protected` members

A `protected` member is private, except that it is accessible in subclasses.

- `m_price` needs to be `protected`, of course.
- Should `m_name` be `protected` or `private`?
  - `private` is ok if the subclass does not modify it. It is accessible through the public `getName` interface.
  - `protected` is also reasonable.

---

## `protected` members

```cpp
class Item {
  std::string m_name;
protected:
  double m_price = 0.0;
public:
  Item() = default;
  Item(const std::string &name, double price)
      : m_name(name), m_price(price) {}
  const auto &getName() const { return m_name; }
  auto netPrice(int cnt) const {
    return cnt * m_price;
  }
};
```

---

## Inheritance

<!-- TODO: There should be a diagram here. -->

By defining `DiscountedItem` to be a subclass of `Item`, **every `DiscountedItem` object contains a subobject of type `Item`.**

- Every data member and member function, except the ctors and dtors, is inherited, **no matter what access level they have**.

What can be inferred from this?

---

## Inheritance

By defining `DiscountedItem` to be a subclass of `Item`, **every `DiscountedItem` object contains a subobject of type `Item`.**

- Every data member and member function, except the ctors and dtors, is inherited, **no matter what access level they have**.

What can be inferred from this?

- A constructor of `DiscountedItem` must first initialize the base class subobject by calling a constructor of `Item`'s.
- The destructor of `DiscountedItem` must call the destructor of `Item` after having destroyed its own members (`m_minQuantity` and `m_discount`).
- `sizeof(Derived) >= sizeof(Base)`

---

## Inheritance

Key points of inheritance:

- Every object of the derived class (subclass) contains a base class subobject.
- Inheritance should not break the encapsulation of the base class.
  - e.g. To initialize the base class subobject, **we must call a constructor of the base class**. It is not allowed to initialize data members of the base class subobject directly.

---

## Constructor of `DiscountedItem`

```cpp
class DiscountedItem : public Item {
  int m_minQuantity = 0;
  double m_discount = 1.0;
public:
  DiscountedItem(const std::string &name, double price,
                 int minQ, double disc)
      : Item(name, price), m_minQuantity(minQ), m_discount(disc) {}
};
```

It is not allowed to write this:

```cpp
DiscountedItem(const std::string &name, double price,
               int minQ, double disc)
    : m_name(name), m_price(price), m_minQuantity(minQ), m_discount(disc) {}
```

---

## Constructor of derived classes

Before the initialization of the derived class's own data members, the base class subobject **must** be initialized by having one of its ctors called.

- What if we don't call the base class's ctor explicitly?

  ```cpp
  DiscountedItem(...)
    : /* ctor of Item is not called */ m_minQuantity(minQ), m_discount(d) {}
  ```

---

## Constructor of derived classes

Before the initialization of the derived class's own data members, the base class subobject **must** be initialized by having one of its ctors called.

- What if we don't call the base class's ctor explicitly?
  - The default constructor of the base class is called.
  - If the base class is not default-constructible, an error.
- What does this constructor do?
  
  ```cpp
  DiscountedItem() = default;
  ```

---

## Constructor of derived classes

Before the initialization of the derived class's own data members, the base class subobject **must** be initialized by having one of its ctors called.

- What if we don't call the base class's ctor explicitly?
  - The default constructor of the base class is called.
  - If the base class is not default-constructible, an error.
- What does this constructor do?
  
  ```cpp
  DiscountedItem() = default;
  ```

  - Calls `Item::Item()` to default-initialize the base class subobject before initializing `m_minQuantity` and `m_discount`.

---

## Constructor of derived classes

In the following code, does the constructor of `DiscountedItem` compile?

```cpp
class Item {
protected:
  std::string m_name;
  double m_price;
public:
  Item(const std::string &name, double p) : m_name(name), m_price(p) {}
};
class DiscountedItem : public Item {
  int m_minQuantity;
  double m_discount;
public:
  DiscountedItem(const std::string &name, double p, int mq, double disc) {
    m_name = name; m_price = p; m_minQuantity = mq; m_discount = disc;
  }
};
```

---

## Constructor of derived classes

In the following code, does the constructor of `DiscountedItem` compile?

```cpp
class Item {
  // ...
public:
  // Since `Item` has a user-declared constructor, it does not have
  // a default constructor.
  Item(const std::string &name, double p) : m_name(name), m_price(p) {}
};
class DiscountedItem : public Item {
  // ...
public:
  DiscountedItem(const std::string &name, double p, int mq, double disc)
  // Before entering the function body, `Item::Item()` is called --> Error!
  { /* ... */ }
};
```

**[Best practice]** <u>Use constructor initializer lists whenever possible.</u>

---

# Dynamic binding

---

## Upcasting

If `D` is a subclass of `B`:
- A `B*` can point to a `D`, and
- A `B&` can be bound to a `D`.

```cpp
DiscountedItem di = someValue();
Item &ir = di; // correct
Item *ip = &di; // correct
```

Reason: The **is-a** relationship! A `D` **is a** `B`.

But on such references or pointers, only the members of `B` can be accessed.

---

## Upcasting: Example

```cpp
void printItemName(const Item &item) {
  std::cout << "Name: " << item.getName() << std::endl;
}
DiscountedItem di("A", 10, 2, 0.8);
Item i("B", 15);
printItemName(i); // "Name: B"
printItemName(di); // "Name: A"
```

`const Item &item` can be bound to either an `Item` or a `DiscountedItem`.

---

## Static type and dynamic type

- **static type** of an expression: The type known at compile-time.
- **dynamic type** of an expression: The real type of the object that the expression is representing. This is known at run-time.

```cpp
void printItemName(const Item &item) {
  std::cout << "Name: " << item.getName() << std::endl;
}
```

The static type of the expression `item` is `const Item`, but its dynamic type is not known until run-time. (It may be `const Item` or `const DiscountedItem`.)

---

## `virtual` functions

`Item` and `DiscountedItem` have different ways of computing the net price.

```cpp
void printItemInfo(const Item &item) {
  std::cout << "Name: " << item.getName()
            << ", price: " << item.netPrice(1) << std::endl;
}
```

- Which `netPrice` should be called?
- How do we define two different `netPrice`s?

---

## `virtual` functions

```cpp
class Item {
public:
  virtual double netPrice(int cnt) const {
    return m_price * cnt;
  }
  // other members
};
class DiscountedItem : public Item {
public:
  double netPrice(int cnt) const override {
    return cnt < m_minQuantity ? cnt * m_price : cnt * m_price * m_discount;
  }
  // other members
};
```

Note: `auto` cannot be used to deduce the return type of `virtual` functions.

---

## Dynamic binding

```cpp
void printItemInfo(const Item &item) {
  std::cout << "Name: " << item.getName()
            << ", price: " << item.netPrice(1) << std::endl;
}
```

The dynamic type of `item` is determined at run-time.

Since `netPrice` is a `virtual` function, which version is called is also determined at run-time:
- If the dynamic type of `item` is `Item`, it calls `Item::netPrice`.
- If the dynamic type of `item` is `DiscountedItem`, it calls `DiscountedItem::netPrice`.

**late binding**, or **dynamic binding**

---

## `virtual`-`override`

To **override** (覆盖/覆写) a `virtual` function,
- The function parameter list must be the same as that of the base class's version.
- The return type should be **identical to** (or ***covariant with***) that of the corresponding function in the base class.
  - We will talk about "covariant with" in later lectures or recitations.
- **The `const`ness should be the same!**

To make sure you are truly overriding the `virtual` function (instead of making a overloaded version), use the `override` keyword.

**\* Not to be confused with "overloading"（重载）.**

---

## `virtual`-`override`

An overriding function is also `virtual`, even if not explicitly declared.

```cpp
class DiscountedItem : public Item {
  virtual double netPrice(int cnt) const override; // correct, explicitly virtual
};
class DiscountedItem : public Item {
  double netPrice(int cnt) const; // also correct, but not recommended
};
```

The `override` keyword lets the compiler check and report if the function is not truly overriding.

**[Best practice]** <u>To override a virtual function, write the `override` keyword explicitly.</u> The `virtual` keyword can be omitted.

---

## `virtual` destructors

```cpp
Item *ip = nullptr;
if (some_condition)
  ip = new Item(/* ... */);
else
  ip = new DiscountedItem(/* ... */);
// ...
delete ip;
```

Whose destructor should be called?

- Only looking at the static type of `*ip` is not enough.

---

## `virtual` destructors

```cpp
Item *ip = nullptr;
if (some_condition)
  ip = new Item(/* ... */);
else
  ip = new DiscountedItem(/* ... */);
// ...
delete ip;
```

Whose destructor should be called? - It needs to be determined at run-time!
- **To use dynamic binding correctly, you almost always need a `virtual` destructor.**

---

## `virtual` destructors

```cpp
Item *ip = nullptr;
if (some_condition)
  ip = new Item(/* ... */);
else
  ip = new DiscountedItem(/* ... */);
// ...
delete ip;
```

- The implicitly-defined (compiler-generated) destructor is **non-`virtual`**, but we can explicitly require a `virtual` one:
  
  ```cpp
  virtual ~Item() = default;
  ```
- If the dtor of the base class is `virtual`, the compiler-generated dtor for the derived class is also `virtual`.

---

## (Almost) completed `Item` and `DiscountedItem`

```cpp
class Item {
  std::string m_name;

protected:
  double m_price = 0.0;

public:
  Item() = default;
  Item(const std::string &name, double price) : m_name(name), m_price(price) {}
  const auto &getName() const { return name; }
  virtual double net_price(int n) const {
    return n * price;
  }
  virtual ~Item() = default;
};
```

---

## (Almost) completed `Item` and `DiscountedItem`

```cpp
class DiscountedItem : public Item {
  int m_minQuantity = 0;
  double m_discount = 1.0;

public:
  DiscountedItem(const std::string &name, double price,
                 int minQ, double disc)
      : Item(name, price), m_minQuantity(minQ), m_discount(disc) {}
  double netPrice(int cnt) const override {
    return cnt < m_minQuantity ? cnt * m_price : cnt * m_price * m_discount;
  }
};
```

---

## Usage with smart pointers

Smart pointers are implemented by wrapping the raw pointers, so they can also be used for dynamic binding.

```cpp
std::vector<std::shared_ptr<Item>> myItems;
for (auto i = 0; i != n; ++i) {
  if (someCondition) {
    myItems.push_back(std::make_shared<Item>(someParams));
  } else {
    myItems.push_back(std::make_shared<DiscountedItem>(someParams));
  }
}
```

A `std::unique_ptr<Derived>` can be implicitly converted to a `std::unique_ptr<Base>`.

A `std::shared_ptr<Derived>` can be implicitly converted to a `std::shared_ptr<Base>`.

---

## Copy-control

Remember to copy/move the base subobject! One possible way:

```cpp
class Derived : public Base {
public:
  Derived(const Derived &other)
      : Base(other), /* Derived's own members */ { /* ... */ }
  Derived &operator=(const Derived &other) {
    Base::operator=(other); // call Base's operator= explicitly
    // copy Derived's own members
    return *this;
  }
  // ...
};
```

Why `Base(other)` and `Base::operator=(other)` work?

- The parameter type is `const Base &`, which can be bound to a `Derived` object.

---

## Synthesized copy-control members

Guess!

- What are the behaviors of the compiler-generated copy-control members?
- In what cases will they be `delete`d?

---

## Synthesized copy-control members

Remeber that the base class's subobject is always handled first.

These rules are quite natural:

- What are the behaviors of the compiler-generated copy-control members?
  - First, it calls the base class's corresponding copy-control member.
  - Then, it performs the corresponding operation on the derived class's own data members.
- In what cases will they be `delete`d?
  - If the base class's corresponding copy-control member is not accessible (e.g. non-existent, or `private`),
  - or if any of the data members' corresponding copy-control member is not accessible.

---

## Slicing

Dynamic binding only happens on references or pointers to base class.

```cpp
DiscountedItem di("A", 10, 2, 0.8);
Item i = di; // What happens?
auto x = i.netPrice(3); // Which netPrice?
```

---

## Slicing

Dynamic binding only happens on references or pointers to base class.

```cpp
DiscountedItem di("A", 10, 2, 0.8);
Item i = di; // What happens?
auto x = i.netPrice(3); // Which netPrice?
```

`Item i = di;` calls the **copy constructor of `Item`**
- but `Item`'s copy constructor handles only the base part.
- So `DiscountedItem`'s own members are **ignored**, or **"sliced down"**.
- `i.netPrice(3)` calls `Item::netPrice`.

---

## Downcasting

```cpp
Base *bp = new Derived{};
```

If we only have a `Base` pointer, but we are quite sure that it points to a `Derived` object
- Accessing the members of `Derived` through `bp` is not allowed.
- How can we perform a **"downcasting"**?

---

## Polymorphic class

A class is said to be **polymorphic** if it has (declares or inherits) at least one virtual function.

- Either a `virtual` normal member function or a `virtual` dtor is ok.

If a class is polymorphic, all classes derived from it are polymorphic.

- There is no way to "refuse" to inherit any member functions, so `virtual` member functions must be inherited.
- The dtor must be `virtual` if the dtor of the base class is `virtual`.

---

## Downcasting: For polymorphic class only

`dynamic_cast<Target>(expr)`.

```cpp
Base *bp = new Derived{};
Derived *dp = dynamic_cast<Derived *>(bp);
Derived &dr = dynamic_cast<Derived &>(*bp);
```

- `Target` must be a **reference** or a **pointer** type.
- `dynamic_cast` will perform **runtime type identification (RTTI)** to check the dynamic type of the expression.
  - If the dynamic type is `Derived`, or a derived class (direct or indirect) of `Derived`, the downcasting succeeds.
  - Otherwise, the downcasting fails. If `Target` is a pointer, returns a null pointer. If `Target` is a reference, throws an exception `std::bad_cast`.

---

## `dynamic_cast` can be very slow

`dynamic_cast` performs a runtime **check** to see whether the downcasting should succeed, which uses runtime type information.

This is **much slower** than other types of casting, e.g. `const_cast`, or arithmetic conversions.

**[Best practice]** <u>Avoid `dynamic_cast` whenever possible.</u>

### Guaranteed successful downcasting: Use `static_cast`.

If the downcasting is guaranteed to be successful, you may use `static_cast`

```cpp
auto dp = static_cast<Derived *>(bp); // quicker than dynamic_cast,
// but performs no checks. If the dynamic type is not Derived, UB.
```

---

## Avoiding `dynamic_cast`

Typical abuse of `dynamic_cast`:

<div style="display: grid; grid-template-columns: 1fr 1fr;">
  <div>

```cpp
struct A {
  virtual ~A() {}
};
struct B : A {};
struct C : A {};
```
  </div>
  <div>

```cpp
std::string getType(const A *ap) {
  if (dynamic_cast<const B *>(ap))
    return "B";
  else if (dynamic_cast<const C *>(ap))
    return "C";
  else
    return "A";
}
```
  </div>
</div>

Click here to see how large and slow the generated code is: https://godbolt.org/z/3367efGd7

---

## Avoiding `dynamic_cast`

Use a group of `virtual` functions!

<div style="display: grid; grid-template-columns: 1fr 1fr;">
  <div>

```cpp
struct A {
  virtual ~A() {}
  virtual std::string name() const {
    return "A";
  }
};
struct B : A {
  std::string name()const override{
    return "B";
  }
};
struct C : A {
  std::string name()const override{
    return "C";
  }
};
```
  </div>
  <div>

```cpp
auto getType(const A *ap) {
  return ap->name();
}
```

- This time: https://godbolt.org/z/KosbcaGnT
  
  The generated code is much simpler!
  </div>
</div>

---

## Summary

Inheritance

- Every object of type `Derived` contains a subobject of type `Base`.
  - Every member of `Base` is inherited, no matter whether it is accessible or not.
- Inheritance should not break the base class's encapsulation.
  - The access control of inherited members is not changed.
  - Every constructor of `Derived` calls a constructor of `Base` to initialize the base class subobject **before** initializing its own data members.
  - The destructor of `Derived` calls the destructor of `Base` to destroy the base class subobject **after** destroying its own data members.

---

## Summary

Dynamic binding

- Upcasting: A pointer, reference or smart pointer to `Base` can be bound to an object of type `Derived`.
  - static type and dynamic type
- `virtual` functions: A function that can be overridden by derived classes.
  - The base class and the derived class can provide different versions of this function.
- Dynamic (late) binding
  - A call to a virtual function on a pointer or reference to `Base` will actually call the corresponding version of that function according to the dynamic type.
- Avoid downcasting if possible.
